Claude Code monitoring guide (#552)
axiomhq/docs: guides/opentelemetry-claude-code.mdx

---
title: 'Monitor Claude Code with Axiom'
description: 'Configure Claude Code to send OpenTelemetry metrics and logs to Axiom for usage monitoring and observability.'
overview: 'Claude Code AI assistant with OpenTelemetry integration'
sidebarTitle: Claude Code
keywords: ['guides', 'claude code', 'claude', 'anthropic', 'otel', 'opentelemetry', 'ai', 'monitoring', 'metrics', 'logs']
logoId: 'openTelemetry'
---

> import ReplaceDatasetToken from "/snippets/replace-dataset-token.mdx"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
import ReplaceToken from "/snippets/replace-token.mdx"
```

## Prerequisites

- [Create an Axiom account](https://app.axiom.co/register).
- Create two datasets in Axiom: one for metrics and one for logs. Claude Code doesn't emit traces. For more information, see [Create dataset](/reference/datasets#create-dataset).
- [Create an API token in Axiom](/reference/tokens) with ingest permissions for both datasets.

## How Axiom routes OpenTelemetry data

Axiom routes data to datasets via headers, and the header differs by signal type:

- Logs use `x-axiom-dataset`
- Metrics use `x-axiom-metrics-dataset`

This means signal-specific header configuration is required rather than a single shared `OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_HEADERS` value.

<Note>
The `/v1/metrics` endpoint only supports the `application/x-protobuf` content type. JSON format isn't supported for metrics ingestion.
</Note>

## Configure environment variables

All configuration happens through environment variables. The script below sets everything needed.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

```bash
#!/bin/bash

# Claude Code OpenTelemetry configuration for Axiom
# Usage: source ./setup-otel.sh && claude

> # Replace these with your own values
> AXIOM_API_TOKEN="API_TOKEN"
> AXIOM_METRICS_DATASET="METRICS_DATASET_NAME"

Reviewer: ```suggestion
AXIOM_API_TOKEN="API_TOKEN"
AXIOM_HOST="AXIOM_DOMAIN"
AXIOM_METRICS_DATASET="METRICS_DATASET_NAME"
```

AXIOM_LOGS_DATASET="LOGS_DATASET_NAME"

# Enable telemetry and configure both exporters
export CLAUDE_CODE_ENABLE_TELEMETRY=1
export OTEL_METRICS_EXPORTER=otlp
export OTEL_LOGS_EXPORTER=otlp

# Axiom's metrics endpoint requires protobuf (no JSON support)
export OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_METRICS_PROTOCOL=http/protobuf
export OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_LOGS_PROTOCOL=http/protobuf

# Separate endpoints per signal type
export OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_METRICS_ENDPOINT=https://AXIOM_DOMAIN/v1/metrics

> export OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_LOGS_ENDPOINT=https://AXIOM_DOMAIN/v1/logs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
export OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_METRICS_ENDPOINT=https://${AXIOM_HOST}/v1/metrics
export OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_LOGS_ENDPOINT=https://${AXIOM_HOST}/v1/logs
```

# Separate headers per signal type (Axiom routes to datasets via different headers)
export OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_METRICS_HEADERS="Authorization=Bearer ${AXIOM_API_TOKEN},x-axiom-metrics-dataset=${AXIOM_METRICS_DATASET}"
export OTEL_EXPORTER_OTLP_LOGS_HEADERS="Authorization=Bearer ${AXIOM_API_TOKEN},x-axiom-dataset=${AXIOM_LOGS_DATASET}"

# Shorter intervals for testing (default: 60s metrics, 5s logs)
export OTEL_METRIC_EXPORT_INTERVAL=10000
export OTEL_LOGS_EXPORT_INTERVAL=5000

# Optional: log full prompt content and tool/MCP details
export OTEL_LOG_USER_PROMPTS=1
export OTEL_LOG_TOOL_DETAILS=1

echo "Axiom OTel configured: metrics -> ${AXIOM_METRICS_DATASET}, logs -> ${AXIOM_LOGS_DATASET}"
```

<Info>

> <ReplaceDatasetToken />

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<ReplaceToken />
```

<ReplaceDomain />
Replace `METRICS_DATASET_NAME` with the name of the Axiom dataset for metrics.
Replace `LOGS_DATASET_NAME` with the name of the Axiom dataset for logs.
</Info>

<Warning>

> Source the script (`source ./setup-otel.sh`) rather than executing it directly. The exported variables must exist in the current shell where `claude` inherits them.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Don't execute the script directly. Source the script instead. The exported variables must exist in the current shell where Claude inherits them.
```

</Warning>

## Verify the integration

<Steps>
<Step title="Source the script and start Claude Code">
Run the following command in your terminal:

```bash
source ./setup-otel.sh && claude
```
</Step>

<Step title="Interact with Claude Code">
Use Claude Code for 15 to 20 seconds to generate telemetry data. Ask questions, run commands, or perform any typical tasks.
</Step>

<Step title="Check the Axiom datasets">

> In Axiom, navigate to your datasets and verify:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
<Step title="Observe telemetry in Axiom">
In Axiom, go to your datasets and observe the telemetry data:
```
